I'm going to play a song for you.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turboville.
Meet major Kurt Burns and Airman
with plenty of passion and little fear.
Texas A&M Class of 1952.
He grew up in a home located about where G.
Raleigh White Coliseum stands today.
This Aggie was a proud flyer who piloted five different
jet fighters during his service in Europe and then Vietnam.
In all nearly 5,000 hours of flying time
in more than 20 years as an Air Force pilot.
He still serves the school he loves so nearly today.
As coach of the A&M Pistol team,
meet the multi-talented Kurt Burns of Brian.
Major Burns, it's a pleasure to have you here.
I want to talk first about growing up on the Texas A&M campus
in the mid to late 30s.
That must have been quite an experience.
That was back when they had a pretty good football team even back then.
One of National Championship two years later.
You look through the not-hold-a-watch John Kimbrough practice
and play, right?
Well, during the time that the team was practicing playing,
every day during football season after school.
I was in A&M consolidated.
And I would go over to the practice field and watch and practice.
And I saw all the home games.
And as a matter of fact, I saw the home games probably from 1937 until
I left a graduate of A&M and left in 52.
And then after I came back in 72.
The campus was quite a bit different then.
Kyle Field was just a small little one-stack stadium.
And actually, you lived on campus because your father was a professor at the time.
And most of the faculty lived on campus at that time, right?
Well, I believe it was an apartment head and deans in higher.
And my father had been head of the department of physiology and pharmacology
for the College of other at that time in school, about your medicine.
Right.
You were born in Brian.
You went to A&M Consolidate that your freshman year in high school.
Then went to Steven F. Austin, which is now Brian High, later on.
And went on to Texas saying,
I was going to be an M. Graduated in 1952.
And that's about the time the Korean War was going on.
So it didn't take long for you to go into active service with the Air Force.
Sort of take us through that time.
Well, when I graduated, I was an IRFORCE ROTC.
And had thoughts about being a pilot that were generated generally during World War II
when I was following the War very closely.
And I'd picture the very things all of them along in my room.
And so I came on active in 1952.
It took them Air Force about a year to get me into a class in flying school.
At the time I was at this hardship position or location,
I was stationed at Palm Beach International Airport.
They had a military transport service training base down there.
They trained pilots for C-124s and C-97s and SA-16s.
And I'd go scrounge rides with pilots as often as I could get off from my work.
Anyway, then I got into flying school with the Barto Air Base,
which is a primary contract field in Barto, Florida, about in the middle of the state.
I flew the T-6G.
I loved the T-6.
I thought an outstanding training plane.
I always thought if a person could learn to fly a master of the T-6, he'd fly anything.
And after that, I was relatively high up in my class and got my choice.
And I chose Brian for a basic go into jets.
You told me that was interesting.
You said that the class, the top half of the class, got to go to jets.
And the bottom half of the class went to fixed wings.
That's true, except for one person in there who had been a SAC navigator in the strategic air command.
His goal was to go to multi-engine training and get into the at that time.
Very new, KC-135s, put in his normal or his required commitment, good work for airlines.
Nothing wrong with that.
He did achieve that.
I was in the top 30 to jet bases.
And I got the chance to come back here to Brian and do my training.
That was in the early 50s.
I guess you graduated.
That was September of 53 until September of 54.
Right. When you finished flying school, like we said in the outset, you flew, I think, five different to jet fighters.
Let's talk about the F-86 because we're going to see a lot of that.
That was my favorite airplane.
My favorite fighter of any.
It was very, I called it a pussycat.
You could have gotten trouble.
If you misshandle the airplane, you could get real trouble.
If you flew it like a fighter ought to be flown, it was very forgiving airplane.
Had relatively few emergencies in the airplane.
A couple of them.
Well, I had smoked the cockpit on a copep with one time right now.
Another time I had trouble getting the nose gear down, but I got held the emergency, landed out and got it landed okay.
But I was fortunate after flying school to have my choice.
I, and I from the class tour, I was able to choose F-86.
It was a choice assignment.
It was a choice to assignment from basic at the time.
Let's move on.
I know later on you took your first of what would be two tours of Germany.
Let's talk about the first time that you went to Ramstein and you were...
Well, I had been instructing F-86's at Williams Air Force Base in Arizona.
And I got this really plumb of an assignment to the 53rd fighter day squadron in what is now Ramstein Air Base Germany.
And in those days, fighter day was air defense, and that was the...
...pittacle of a fighter pilot's assignment.
And had about half the tour there at Ramstein in air defense as the day fighter pilot in the F-100C.
The F-100C was probably the best day fighter they had at that time.
And then they reconfigured the whole wing, including our squadron, as a nuclear strike mission.
And it spent the last half of my tour in the 53rd, basically training for and sitting alert on Tomic Bomb.
And with task for tactical missions in East Germany and Teklasovakia, and I had one tour.
It was in Soviet Union.
Right.
I want to backtrack just a little bit back to when you were at Texas A&M in a senior in 1952, right at Eastern 1952.
Before you graduated, you married your wife Ann.
Yes.
And special moment in your life, and you all are still married.
I know that you've been married for 54 years.
How about that?
You came back, I believe, to a Moody Air Force base.
Talk about the MAPS program.
Military assistant pack.
Okay.
It was a very interesting part of your career.
After flying F-100C in Germany, I came back to our training command.
And I was able to get into what they called a MAP pilot training program.
MAP stands for Military Assistant Packed.
We trained pilots from 26 different nations.
And supposedly all friendly nations, although I can think of about three or four of those countries that
pilots went back with flu migs.
But the minority of our students were Vietnamese.
South Vietnamese started this in 1961.
Right.
And hardly anybody else outside of the military knew what Vietnam was in those days.
I stayed in this squad for almost five years.
And it was one of the more rewarding tours that I flew, even though I was training in a propeller driven trainer, the T-28.
But I felt like I was achieving something worthwhile.
So in the early 60s, you became very familiar with the South Vietnamese people.
And the way the insurgency was going in Vietnam.
Right.
Before really any of the general public really were really aware about the South Vietnamese or what their struggles were, what was about to happen.
True.
Obviously.
But then later on you were deployed to Vietnam.
Yes.
And you thought you were going to probably be going out of country, but turns out you were in the country.
That was just a win.
I went through a four transition at Davis, Mothin.
I had volunteered for Vietnam.
And what I had hoped was to go to either U-Bahn or U-Dorn in Thailand.
And they were the ones that went out and chased me.
And supported the also bond over North Vietnam.
But as the luck of the draw of the Air Force decided they wanted me to go in country to Camarand Bay.
And the twelfth tech fighter wing was the F4, well I had two F4 wings.
The other was at the name.
But we did missions in country and luck was such that I never went out country and never went mission in the North.
Right.
So your day-to-day job was to fly the fighters.
And you said that in combat situations you didn't have what you would describe as many terrifying moments.
But you described one terrifying moment that actually happened that wasn't in a combat situation.
That's true.
I spent about a month or so in Korea.
After the North Korean had hijacked our intelligence ship the Pueblo.
And the Air Force sent a couple of wings from the States and had squadron up from Vietnam.
And our mission was air defense with the F4C.
And we were loaded with four side-winder missiles, four spare missiles, and a gun pod with 1100 rounds of 20 millimeter ammunition for the Gatling gun underneath.
So we were loaded for bear.
But what you were talking about, the mission that just terrified me.
And I guess what it was, I actually woke up from a scramble passing through 5,000 feet.
Apparently I was in an Alpha State or something.
But I do remember the middle of the night.
And the middle of the night is 3 o'clock 3 a.m. in the morning.
I was from a dead sleep.
I didn't remember the clocks and horn waking me up or putting my boots with a lacing of boots up and our zipping them up and running out the airplane starting it up.
And the back seat at all the radio works.
But I was the flight leader so I had a flight.
And we were in the middle of the night going up and I just became conscious of it all at about 5,000 feet.
And that just terrified me.
I would imagine saying that.
And did everything by road memory?
Apparently did everything right.
We were at the back seat or what had gotten on me?
You glad it only happened once.
Speaking of back seat, I know in Vietnam you wanted to talk about a friend named Tom Burge.
Yes, Tom Burge.
I trained with at Davis Mountain.
He was my assigned back seat.
Now he was a young pilot right out of the pilot's school.
But most of the back seaters in F4s at the time in Vietnam were pilots rather than radar observers.
And so I flew most of my missions in Vietnam with Tom.
And after I left I put in about two thirds of a tour at Cameron Bay.
And then they reassigned me to Tonsonute to be in country briefing officer for General Brown, the commanding general.
And I at the time at Cameron Bay was the flight commander and I reliquished my flight to my assistant flight commander.
Tom Burge was the best back seater in the flight.
So he took over my back seat here.
And they unfortunately were killed and I tried to catch on a nice grumble at night.
So he didn't make it back.
I often think about Tom and he was fine in men.
Well, I know you do and we salute his service also.
You were talking about flying and sort of the thrills of flying.
And I remember you were telling me about taking off in these fighters when they were full load and full heavy.
And sort of a method of taking off that I'm somewhat unbelievable.
But I'm going to let you tell the story.
Well, normally every take off ever made an effort even loaded with weapons in Vietnam.
The normal take was to take the stick and put it all the way back against the seat and hold it there.
And put the power up full power and go into afterburn.
And when you got to the nose wheel lift off speed, which is around 145, 150,
and those would just come up and would fly off just like a Pipercat.
We had one mission when the case on battle.
The marine outpost at case on was pretty hot.
Where the North Vietnamese had put in a bunch of cannons, guns,
on the reverse slope of a mountain northeast of the case on air strip.
They were not only shooting across the top of the mountain at the air strip,
but they're also shooting using some for any aircraft shooting at aircraft.
So they wanted to go up there with a maximum load they told us.
And during the briefing they said, well, because you're going to have 12, 750 pound bombs loaded on this F4,
the center of gravity is going to be a little bit too far, far, and by the way,
it's over gross the airplane, but that's okay during combat, you don't bother with things like it.
And they said the airplane won't take off.
That's an issue.
After we survived the shock, they said, what you have to do is leave the stick and neutral
so that the stabilator or the elevator is in neutral and thus the least amount of drag.
And when you get to 153 knots, take the stick and bang it against the importer of battle.
Back against the seat and hold it there.
And what happens is that this puts the nose down and depresses the nose gear strut
and then it rebounds up to an angle of attack where you can take off and we took off.
We sat there and said, mm, mentally, yes sir, we did all work.
And we're getting it.
It's like they said that it was like it is.
We're going to some photographs right now that Major Burns has supplied for us here.
These are photographs that come from his home and I'm going to let him talk about them as they come on the screen.
I talk about this picture of what we're looking at.
Well, that was the airplane that I had in my name, not it, and Tom Burns.
Unfortunately, the name was on the other side, but it just failed to get a picture of what our names are.
This was the armant crew and they had just finished arming the aircraft and to go on the mission
we had arrived out at the airplane ready to go on another mission.
Now, is that the Phantom 2?
That is the F4 Phantom 2.
F4 Phantom 2.
Okay.
Let's go on to the next photograph.
There you are.
That's a picture of me.
Pretty nice handlebar mustache.
Why does that have to be so nice there?
Nice butterfly mustache.
Funny story about that.
I was quite a commander and just about everybody in the twelfth when you, I guess, in the hierarchy tolerated but didn't really like mustache on the pilots.
And General Ryan, who I believe was the commander of Pac-Aff at the time, was visiting Cameron Bay in my squadron commander,
and he says, Burns, you go up the tower and you stay there the whole time the journal's up there.
I knew exactly what he was talking about because General Ryan wasn't about to climb all those stairs up the top of the tower and seemed to be with a mustache.
So I got away.
Indeed.
Okay. Let's move on.
This is the picture that I had commissioned of a painter that paints aviation really in sight.
And I told him about it and gave him some pictures of that forest of KC-135's.
After we took off with that load of 12, 700 pound bombs, we didn't really have enough fuel to get up the case on.
So we had to hit the tanker and get refueled on the way up there.
Right.
And that's what that depicts.
Five, five, two in my airplanes.
The one sitting up there on the wing waiting to get refueled.
Right.
Let's go into the next picture.
You have a collection in your home.
Oh, that's my gun collection later on.
But go ahead and tell us what we're looking at.
Back in the 50s and 60s, I was quite active in gun collecting.
And most of those guns used to be just in pawn shops and gun shops where I mostly bought them.
And people had them for bureau drawer guns and so forth.
And they were very cheap.
And in 1968, when they had the rights in California, virtually all guns.
Handguns disappeared useful handguns.
They disappeared from gun shops.
And when they came back, they were all regarded as collectors items.
Yeah.
But I had already put together a complete representative sample of all of the 38 ACP,
38 caliber automatics that Cope made from 1900 to about 1928.
That's quite a collection.
A lot of veterans have shadow boxes.
That's quite a shadow box of your own.
A lot of those metals were shooting metals.
Right.
That's an amazing thing that I got to see in your home.
We've got one more picture of your family.
That's my family.
That's you and your wife.
My wife and I and my son and daughter-in-law.
My son is assistant district attorney in Dallas County.
That's pretty.
And I think 19 years, that's pretty.
And your daughter-in-law.
And a lot of Tracy.
And you and Adam had an older son, Glenn, who unfortunately lost you.
Yeah.
How are you, Alex?
And an accident.
But that's your family.
That was taken just a few years ago.
So, buying a looking family there.
I want to go to live right here in our studio now.
And you are a collector of models of the planes that you have flown.
Show us a little bit what we're looking at right here.
Oh, just about area.
And the air force has a model of airplanes and flew.
This is the F-100.
This one is the first one.
That's the F-86 F-6.
That's the one on the left as you're looking at the screen.
Go ahead and pull it back in there.
There we go.
And this was the next one, the F-100.
Now, for the purist to look at this,
you'll see that's an F-100D.
I did fly some of the D, but most of my time was in the C model.
And then after my training allied pilots,
I went to F-4's transition.
I flew the C model.
And this is the F-4.
And I flew that in Vietnam.
And the subsequent assignments to Europe.
That one right there.
The subsequent assignment to Europe.
I flew the D model and the E model.
And this one, I had an opportunity.
Well, I was at Thompsonute.
And I had so many friends in the Vietnamese Air Force.
And there were probably eight to ten people that I had trained
in the one jet squadron in Vietnam, 62 squadron.
And they were flying the F-5 Freedom Fighter.
And this is a model that has the Vietnamese markings on it.
It's just the exact light flew.
And they let me fly the airplane.
I think they had 19 combat sorties with the V-9.
That was a great fun.
Well, they're fascinating.
I had great regard for the Vietnamese pilots.
I'm a fan of the models.
And these are really, really stuff.
After Vietnam, you actually took another tour of Europe of Germany.
You went back to Europe.
I had a concurrent tour back over to Europe.
I liked Europe, and the family got to go both times.
So I had two kids by the time I got over there.
And they thrived on Europe.
Indeed.
You came back to Texas A&M, and I know, and you taught there for seven or eight years.
You finally retired from the Air Force after twenty-one years.
I retired in 1973 after twenty years of flying.
I'm going to admit that my sole motivation in the Air Force was flying
and fighters if possible.
And after twenty years of Air Force out of policy where all people who had been flying twenty years,
quote, unquote, didn't need to fly anymore.
And so that was concurrent with my completion of my overseas tour.
I just couldn't see coming back to the States, sitting at some desk and watching everybody fly.
So I was able to retire twenty-one years and did.
Came back to Texas A&M, worked in the executive development office and taught management for a while.
I taught management for a couple of semesters, something like that.
I had earned a master's degree from USC while I was in the Air Force.
It was then qualified to teach it.
And I stayed with A&M about eight years, I guess, and then my wife and I owned a health food store.
And I helped besides that, I worked for you, I've worked for about three years, I've been saying to them.
I don't know where I got the idea about during my career.
I always had the idea in my mind that I would try, I'd like to retire at age 55.
And we script and save and invested and were able to do it.
Well, I want to get it, we've only got about three minutes left.
And I want to talk about the A&M pistol team because you've been the coach of the pistol team for thirty years.
During the 60s, I had to go out and qualify with the pistol every year.
And it hurt my pride because of the pistol collection I had that I couldn't shoot the 45 well.
So I got a guy that was on the pistol team at Randolph.
And in my squadron, taught me how to shoot a 45.
Apparently showed him some talent and asked me to go on the pistol team.
And so I was on the pistol team at Randolph for several years and on Davis, Monthon, several years.
And I wasn't great, but I was almost.
But anyway, I was good enough where after the Vietnam and the United States and Europe,
which was total about six years, came back and got us kind of over the hill.
And it's a more competing.
But I did volunteer and started coaching.
Actually, I had to start up a team that had started up the pistol team in 1974.
And I've been coaching it ever since.
And I enjoy coaching every bit as much as I did competing.
And it is really a lot of fun.
Two years ago, my, I coached both the university team and the ROTC pistol team.
The ROTC pistol team won the National ROTC pistol championship.
So I was quite proud of that.
And finished second last year?
Is that right?
Second last year.
But it's a whole new year now.
A whole new year?
We're going to win it again.
There's about a dozen on each team.
I think you said on the university team and the ROTC team.
And they compete against other schools.
It's not a, well, it's a double-ac support for the students.
For example, we go to the National Collegial Pistol Championships.
They invite the top 10 teams in the nation.
We've been in the top 10 teams in the nation.
26, I know.
24 out of the last 26 years that they've had the National Championships.
And we finished, the best we finished is third.
But I was quite proud of our ROTC team winning it.
That was two years ago.
And I believe you're hosting at a match.
We'll have a match at about three weeks.
Right.
Nationals this year, instead of being in Fort Benning,
it's going to be at West Point.
All of our team members are access to Goop and see West Point.
Well, we got them in football this past year.
We'll get them in pistol also.
Thank you very much for your service.
We're out of time and I appreciate it.
Thank you, sir.
Major Burns.
The pilot and Vietnam Kurt Burns could hardly stand being in active.
He flew four or five days a week.
But that was three or four days a week too few for his taste.
And now his passion is the A&M pistol team, his family.
Trying to help the pistol team win another national title.
We salute Major Curtis Burns for his service as we salute all veterans.
I'm Tom Turboville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.